.\" Simple greylisting system for mail transport agents
.TH "greylistd" "8" "0.8" "Tor Slettnes" "Mail Administration"
.SH "NAME"
greylistd \- simple greylisting system for mail transport agents
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B greylistd
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SS "Greylisting"
This daemon provides a simple greylisting implementation for use with
Exim and other mail transport agents (MTAs).  For a more elaborate
introduction to greylisting, please refer to Evan Harris' whitepaper 
at:
	http://projects.puremagic.com/greylisting/

Greylisting is a simple but highly effective means to weed out
messages that are being delivered via spamware/ratware tools.  The
idea is to establish whether a prior relationship exists between the
sender and the receiver of a message.  Most of the time it does, and
the delivery proceeds normally.

On the other hand, if no prior relationship exists, the delivery is
temporarily rejected, using a 451 SMTP response.  Legitimate MTAs will
treat this response accordingly, and retry the delivery in a while.
In contrast, ratware will usually fail to retry the delivery in a
normal fashion.

As a result, greylisting is currently more than 90% effective in
blocking incoming junk mail, while nearly all legitimate mail goes
through.

Three pieces of information (herafter called a \fItriplet\fP) from the
delivery attempt are cached for future reference:

  - The address of the host attempting the delivery
  - The envelope sender address (MAIL FROM:)
  - The envelope recipient address (RCPT TO:)

If a delivery attempt was temporarily rejected, then after an initial
timeout (60 minutes by default), but before a retry expiration time (8
hours by default), new delivery attempts with the same \fItriplet\fP
are accepted, and the \fItriplet\fP is added to a whitelist.  This
allows for delivery retries, presumably from legitimate MTAs, and
ensures that future mail from the same contact is not subject to
greylisting.

If a whitelisted \fItriplet\fP has not been seen for an extended
duration (by default 60 days), it is expired.  This prevents unlimited
growth of the list.

The downside to greylisting is that legitimate mail from people who
have never sent you mail in the past (or, at least, within the last 60
days) are subject to a one-hour delay.

The upside is that the current generation of ratware tools will not be
able to deliver spam or virii to you.  Even if, as a result of lots of
sites incorporating the greylisting concept, ratware tools are
modified such that temporarily rejected deliveries are retried, you
stand an increased chance of blocking such mail.  That is because
within the mandatory 1-hour initial delay, chances are that the
sending host's IP address has been listed in one or more DNS block
lists (such as bl.spamcop.net, cbl.abuseat.org, etc..), and can be
rejected by your MTA by consulting these lists directly, or via
anti-spam software like SpamAssassin.
.SS "greylistd"
\fBgreylistd\fP is meant to be installed on a server that accepts
incoming mail.  The MTA on this server connects to the greylistd
daemon over a UNIX domain socket (by default
\fI/var/run/greylistd/socket\fP), or alternatively via the command
\fBgreylist\fP(1), and submits a string (\fItriplet\fP) that
identifies a particular host/sender/recipient relationship.
\fBgreylistd\fP responds "white", "grey" or "black", depending on the
current listing status of the provided \fItriplet\fP.  Alternatively,
if either of the "--white", "--grey", or "--black" options precede the
data, \fBgreylistd\fP responds "true" or "false", indicating whether
the triplet is currently in the corresponding state.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.SS "Exim 4"
A sample greylistd statement for Exim 4 is provided with this package,
and can normally be found in
"/usr/share/doc/greylistd/examples/exim4-acl-example.txt".

.SS "Others"
What others?  :-)

A prerequisite to greylisting in general is the ability to perform
custom filtering throughout the various stages in the SMTP
transaction, most notably after the \fBRCPT TO:\fP SMTP command.  In
particular, \fBgreylistd\fP(8) can be invoked either over a UNIX
domain socket or via the supplied \fBgreylist\fP(1) utility.

Although \fBgreylistd\fP(8) is written mainly with Exim in mind, it
should be possible to use it with any MTA that:
.IP "  -"
Allows arbitrary strings to be passed on via a UNIX domain socket
(\fB/var/run/greylistd/socket\fP) or supplied to external programs
(\fBgreylist\fP(1)).
.IP "  -"
Can defer the incoming delivery, based on the response.
.PP
Some MTAs either have limited or no support for such external filters
in the SMTP transaction (e.g. Sendmail), or define a very custom
interface for such filters (e.g. Postifx "Policy Servers").

That said, solutions exist for these other MTAs as well.  For Postfix,
check into "postgrey", and for Sendmail there is "relaydelay".  For
other MTAs, check the links on Evan Harris' greylisting project page:

    http://projects.puremagic.com/greylisting/links.html

.SH "FILES"
.SS "/etc/greylistd/config"
Configuration settings.  Currently, this file consists of three
sections:
.IP "[timeout]" 4
Lists various timeouts used to determine how long to keep a new
\fItriplet\fP greylisted, and when to expire previosly known
\fItriplet\fPs.
.IP "[socket]" 4
Specifies path and permissions of the UNIX domain socket on which
\fBgreylistd\fP will listen.
.IP "[data]" 4
Specifies the paths to the data files, containing the data items and
statistics, as well as an \fIupdate interval\fP specifying how often
data will be written to these files.
.SS "/var/lib/greylistd/states"
(default path, can be modified in the configuration file)

Runtime data.  Theare are four sections:
.BR "[white]" ", " "[grey]" ", " "[black]" " and " "[statistics]" ". "
The first three sections consist of lines of the form:

    \fIhash\fP = \fIlastseen firstseen count\fP

where:
.IP "  -" 4
\fIhash\fP is a 32-bit value representing a given \fItriplet\fP,
.IP "  -" 4
\fIlastseen\fP is a 32-bit value representing the timestamp of last
delivery attempt for this triplet,
.IP "  -" 4
\fIfirstseen\fP is a 32-bit value representing the timestamp of first
known delivery attempt for this triplet,
.IP "  -" 4
\fIcount\fP is a 32-bit value representing the number of delivery
attempts that have been made for this triplet in this time period.
.PP
The \fB[statistics]\fP section contains a counter for each of the
three lists, indicating how many items that has ever made its way into
these lists by way of the \fBupdate\fP protocol.
.SS "/var/lib/greylistd/triplets"
(default path, can be modified in the configuration file)

Unhashed data - i.e. the original triplets passed to greylistd.
Internally, \fBgreylistd\fP(8) hashes the provided data into a single
32-bit value for efficiency.  Prior to version 0.6, the original data
was not retained; as of version 0.6, data is optionally saved into
this file.

Data items are saved in the form:
    \fIhash\fP = \fIdata\fP ...
.SS "/var/run/greylistd/socket"
(default path, can be modified in the configuration file)

The UNIX domain socket providing the main interface to "greylistd".
The MTA can either connect to this socket directly, or use the
supplied "greylist" utility to do so.
.SH "BUGS"
Because \fItriplet\fPs and timestamps are hashed into simple 32-bit
values, there is a very slim chance that deliveries that should have
been greylisted are allowed through.  More so for very busy sites.

Commands are actually executed in the daemon, not the "greylist"
client.  If the user who invokes "greylist" interactively has a
different time zone than the daemon process, time and date
representations in the output will reflect those of the daemon. 
.SH "AUTHOR"
This python script and manual page is written by Tor Slettnes,
originally for Debian GNU/Linux.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright \(co 2004-2005 Tor Slettnes.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

On a Debian GNU/Linux system, the full text of the GPL is available in
/usr/share/common-licenses/GPL.  It is also available at:

    http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IP "http://projects.puremagic.com/greylisting/"
Evan Harris' greylisting whitepaper
.IP "\fBgreylist\fP(1)"
Command-line interface to the greylist daemon.
.IP "\fBgreylistd-setup-exim4\fP(8)"
Utility to add/remove support for greylistd in Exim 4 configuration files.
