.\" Simple greylisting system for mail transport agents
.TH "greylist" "1" "0.8" "Tor Slettnes" "Mail Administration"
.SH "NAME"
greylist \- command line interface to \fBgreylistd(8)\fP
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.BR "greylist " { " -h " | " --help " | " help " }
.br
.B "greylist "
.I "operation ..."
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This program provides a command line interface to \fBgreylistd\fP(8);
please refer to that manual page for more information on the purpose
and functionality of this program.


.SH "USAGE"
In the following discussion, \fIdata...\fP typically refers to
the following \fItriplet\fP of information:

  \fI<sending host's IP address> <sender@address> <recipient@address>\fP

The following operations are available:
.IP "\fBadd\fP [\fB--white\fP|\fB--grey\fP|\fB--black\fP] \fIdata...\fP"
Add \fIdata\fP to the corresponding list (\fBwhite\fP if unspecified).
If the \fItriplet\fP of a future mail deliveriy (subject to timeouts)
matches this data, the idea is that the message would be accepted,
temporarily rejected, or permanently rejected, respectively.
.IP "\fBdelete\fP \fIdata...\fP" 
Remove \fIdata\fP from all lists.  If the data exists in any list, the
command returns an exit status of 0, otherwise -1.  A message is
printed on standard output indicating the action taken.
.IP "\fBcheck\fP [\fB--white\fP|\fB--grey\fP|\fB--black\fP] \fIdata...\fP"
Check the current status of \fIdata\fP, i.e. if a message delivery
would succeed if its \fItriplet\fP matched this data.  If a list is
specified, the word "true" or "false" is printed, indicating whether
the data was in the corresponding list; the exit status is also set
accordingly.  Otherwise, one of the words "white", "grey", and "black"
is written on standard output, and the exit status is 0, 1, or 2, 
respectively.

NOTE: This operation is non-intrusive, and thus does not update any of
the greylist data.  So, for instance, if the \fIdata\fP is currently
in the "grey" list, but its minimum retry time (\fBretryMin\fP) has
elapsed, the text "white" would be printed.  However, unless an
\fBupdate\fP takes place prior to the \fBretryMax\fP timeout, the
\fIdata\fP would still expire from the "grey" list.
.IP "\fBupdate\fP [\fB--white\fP|\fB--grey\fP|\fB--black\fP] \fIdata...\fP"
Same, but also update the greylist data accordingly.  So if \fIdata\fP
is currently greylisted, but the minimum retry time \fBretryMin\fP has
elapsed since it was first seen, \fIdata\fP is moved to the "white"
list.

This operation would normally be used by mail transport agents (MTAs).
.IP "\fBstats\fP"
Print some statistics on greylist utilization and hits. 
.IP "\fBmrtg\fP"
Print statistics on greylist and whitelist hits in a format that MRTG
can use as an External Monitoring Script.
.IP "\fBlist\fP [\fB--white\fP] [\fB--grey\fP] [\fB--black\fP]"
Print available (original/unhashed) data items from the corresponding
list(s).

NOTE: Internally, \fBgreylistd\fP(8) hashes the provided data into a
single 32-bit value for efficiency.  Prior to version 0.6, the
original data was not retained; as of version 0.6, data is saved if
the "savetriplets" setting in the [data] section of the configuration
file is "true".  Only data items (i.e. triplets) that have been seen
while this setting were enabled can be listed.
.IP "\fBsave\fP"
Force greylist data to be immediately saved (synchronized) to the
filesystem.

Data is also saved after any operation if a certain \fIupdate
interval\fP (default is 300 seconds/5 minutes) has elapsed since the
last save, and there are no pending requests to \fBgreylistd\fP(8).

.IP "\fBreload\fP"
Save greylist data to files, then reload configuration and data.

.IP "\fBclear\fP [\fB--white\fP] [\fB--grey\fP] [\fB--black\fP]"
Clear all items in the specified list(s), or all lists if none is
specified.

If the whitelist is cleared, \fIall\fP new data trilplets will
initially be in a "grey" state.

Use with caution!
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.IP "greylist add --white 1.2.3.4 mailinglist@somewhere subscriber@yourhost"
Whitelists messages received from the IP address 1.2.3.4 on behalf of 
<mailinglist@somewhere> to <subscriber@yourhost>.
.IP "greylist check --grey 1.2.3.4 mailinglist@somewhere subscriber@yourhost"
Prints "true" or "false" on standard output, depending on whether mail
received from the IP address 1.2.3.4 on behalf of
<mailinglist@somewhere> to <subscriber@yourhost> should be deferred or
not, respectively.  The data is neither recorded nor changed to a
"white" state. 
.SH "FILES"
.SS "/var/run/greylistd/socket"
The UNIX domain socket providing the main interface to "greylistd".
.PP
.SH "AUTHOR"
This python script and manual page is written by Tor Slettnes,
originally for Debian GNU/Linux.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright \(co 2004-2005 Tor Slettnes.
.IP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
.PP
On a Debian GNU/Linux system, the full text of the GPL is available in
/usr/share/common-licenses/GPL.  It is also available at:
	http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IP "\fBgreylistd\fP(8)"
Greylisting daemon.
.IP "\fBgreylistd-setup-exim4\fP(8)"
Utility to add/remove support for greylistd in Exim 4 configuration files.
